Computational Learning Theory 101

1. What is Linear Threshold Function?

   Threshold: gate; the point at which a physiological or
   psychological effect begins to be produced.

2. What is Unsupervised Learning?

   In machine learning, unsupervised learning refers to the problem of
   trying to find hidden structure in unlabeled data. Since the
   examples given to the learner are unlabeled, there is no error or
   reward signal to evaluate a potential solution.

   Unsupervised learning is closely related to the problem of density
   estimation in statistics.

3. What is clustering?

   Cluster analysis or clustering is the task of assigning a set of
   objects into groups (called clusters) so that the objects in the
   same cluster are more similar (in some sense or another) to each
   other than to those in other clusters.

4. What is half-space?

   In geometry, a half-space is either of the two parts into which a
   plane divides the three-dimensional euclidean space. More
   generally, a half-space is either of the two parts into which a
   hyperplane divides an affine space.

   upper half-space:
   a_1 * x_1 + a_2 * x_2 + ... + a_n * x_n > b

5. What do you mean by "classes of functions"

   Classes of Boolean functions that considered in COLT.

   1) Disjunctive Normal Form Formulae
      term: a conjunction of literals.
      DNF:  a disjunction of terms.

   2) Conjunctive Normal Form Formulae
      clause: a disjunction of literals.
      CNF:    a conjunction of clauses

      * K-TERM-DNF != K-CNF
      n-CNF can represent every function with input from x_1 to x_n
      (also negated symbols). But it takes 2^n-TERM DNF to represent
      every function with input from x_1 to x_n. In other words,
      there are some functions that n-TERM DNF cannot represent but
      n-CNF can. With So K-TERM-DNF \subseteq K-CNF, we can say that
      K-TERM-DNF \subset K-CNF

  3) Decision Trees
     Decision Lists

6. What do you mean by co-dimension?

   ???????????????????????????????

7. What is cardinality?

   The cardinality of a set is a measure of the "number of elements of
   the set".

8. What deos H_{n,m} mean?

   I guess H_{n,m} is the representation class over X_{n,m}. And
   X_{n,m} means the input space with input x_1,...,x_n and m.

   At AICLT spage 35, H_n = \sum_{m>=1} H_{n,m}. As we can see, n
   represents the original n inputs x_1,...,x_n. m just represents the
   number of samples.

9. What is the union bound?

   For any finite or countable set of events, the probability that at
   least one of the events happens is no greater than the sum of the
   probabilities of the individual events.

10. What is hyperplane?

A hyperplane is any codimension-1 vector subspace of a vector
space. Let a_1, a_2, ..., a_n be scalars not all equal to 0. Then the
set S consisting of all vectors X = (x_1, x_2, ..., x_n) in R^n such
that a_1 x_1 + a_2 x_2 + ... + a_n x_n = c for c a constant is a
subspace of R^n called a hyperplane. 

11. What is the norm of a vector?

In linear algebra, a norm is a function that assigns a strictly
positive length or size to all vectors in a vector space, other than
the zero vector.

|v| = \sqrt {a_1^2 + a_2^2 + ... + a_n^2}

12. What is the distance from a point to a hyperplane?

Let P = (x_1, y_1, z_1),
    hyperplane: A(x - x_0) + B(y - y_0) + C(z - z_0) = 0
    	     => Ax + By + Cz + D = 0
	     	D = -Ax_0 - By_0 - Cz_0
		Q (x_0, y_0, z_0)

Let v = vector P to Q = (x_1 - x_0, y_1 - y_0, z_1 - z_0)
    N = (A, B, C) -- the normal vector of the hyperplane
 -> n = N / |N| = (A, B, C) / \sqrt {A^2 + B^2 + C^2}

d = |v*n|
  = |(x_1 - x_0, y_1 - y_0, z_1 - z_0) * n|
  = |A(x_1 - x_0) + B(y_1 - y_0) + C(z_1 - z_0)| / \sqrt {A^2 + B^2 + C^2}

 ** since D = -Ax_0 - By_0 - Cz_0, we have

  = |Ax_1 + By_1 + Cz_1 + D| / \sqrt {A^2 + B^2 + C^2}

13. What is support vector machine?

A support vector machine (SVM) is a concept in statistics and computer
science for a set related supervised learning methods that analyze
data and recognize patterns, used for classification and regression
analysis. The standard SVM takes a set of input data and predicts, for
each given input, which of two possible classes forms the input,
making the SVM a non-probabilistic binary linear classifier. Given a
set of training examples, each marked as belonging to one of two
categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a model that assigns new
examples into one category or the other.

14. What is gradient descent?

Gradient descent is a first-order optimization algorithm. To find a
local minimum of a function using gradient descent, one takes steps
proportional to the negative of the gradient (or of the approximate
gradient) of the function at the current point. If instead one takes
steps proportional to the positive of the gradient, one approaches a
local maximum of that function; the procedure is then known as
gradient ascent.

15. What is the intuition of halfspace's weight? And why intersection
of two weight W halfspaces has PTF degree O(log W)?



16. Convex functions, so what?

f(tx_1 + (1-t)x_2 ) < t f(x_1) + (1-t) f(x_2)

17. What is symmetric difference?

In mathematics, the symmetric difference of two sets is the set of
elements which are in either of the sets and not in their
intersection. 

18. 




